Hang on.
And welcome to the other end of the table.
From the frying pan into the fire. So,
we'll leave it in your hands. We've got you for an hour.
You will have around 10 minutes for opening remarks,
and then we'll get into some questions.
Thank you very much, Chair, and it's great to be here.
It's a little bit different being at this end of the table, and I was sort of
reminiscing. It's like, "Hmm," it's like the frying pan into the fire maybe as
well. But great to be in front of the best select committee in Parliament as well.
You got it. So thanks very much. Good start.
Just introduce who's here beside me.
We've got Jen Wright,
acting CE, and on my right here we've got Nick Dixon,
Enterprise Services as well. So, without further ado, I will just
launch into some brief introductory remarks.
I'd just like to begin by saying that as a relatively new minister in this
portfolio, I've really enjoyed coming on board and getting to
know the portfolio and the breadth of the work that Land Information New Zealand
delivers. I would also just like to acknowledge
the support of my predecessor, the Honourable Chris Penk,
and the support of Jen and the wider team behind me as I get to
grips with the portfolio.
It's been a valuable opportunity to better understand how LINZ supports New
Zealanders from managing overseas investment
in a way that benefits New Zealand, to enabling the productive use of Crown land,
protecting our natural environment and tackling complex biosecurity
challenges. As you're all aware, LINZ is responsible for around
1.5 million hectares of Crown land, including
properties in the Treaty Settlements Land Bank, pastoral
leases, and lakes and riverbeds. It also underpins New
Zealand's property rights system, typically recording more than
600,000 instruments against titles, which is about
1,650 for every day of the year,
and approving over 11,000 survey plans each and every year.
In addition, LINZ is progressing work to 3D map more than
40% of New Zealand's coastline.
I've also been encouraged by the progress LINZ is making in modernising how it
works, including the use of digital tools and AI to
improve services and productivity across the organisation.
Today, I'll touch on a number of key areas, including the overseas investment,
Crown pastoral land reforms, and freshwater weed control, some
of which may answer
in advance questions you may have.
Earlier this year, the government made improvements to the Overseas Investment Act.
These changes balance this government's view that most overseas investment is
low risk and should be encouraged while still protecting New Zealand's
national interest and our most sensitive assets like
farmland and houses.
As the regulatory agency for the overseas investment regime, LINZ has
implemented changes to its systems and processes to deliver the government's
expectation that applications are processed more quickly under the new
test that gives investors certainty faster.
And as a result, the latest figures show that over 90% of
applications are assessed within 50% of the timeframe set for
them under regulation.
LINZ is also maintaining public transparency around foreign investment
into New Zealand with summaries of all overseas investment decisions published on
the LINZ website the month following each decision.
And in addition, LINZ is also ensuring the rules are
enforced. I was very pleased to see a strong response
to the discovery of an Australian investor trying to circumvent the rules
and illegally buy sensitive farmland.
This resulted in $440,000 in penalties for the
foreign investor and the New Zealander who was their associate and
frontman.
The Public Works Amendment Bill was introduced in December last year and is
now ready for its second reading. Changes to this act will provide fairer
compensation, including incentive payments for all acquisitions and
encouraging early agreement to make it easier for landowners and
agencies to navigate the system, helping accelerate the delivery of
infrastructure such as roads, schools and hospitals.
And the bill also provides a new process for acquiring land more quickly
that will also support communities to recover more quickly from
emergencies. However, those provisions will only be
activated when necessary and will not be needed for all state of
emergency events. A key priority has been progressing the
Crown Land Legislation Amendment Bill, which has now been introduced to
Parliament.
The reforms are about unlocking opportunity while maintaining appropriate
stewardship of the land.
Under the bill, Crown pastoral leaseholders will have greater ability to
maximize land use and pursue new economic opportunities
alongside pastoral farming. And this includes activities
like farm shops selling products grown or reared on farm, small scale
hospitality ventures, and potential renewable energy
projects. These changes will support economic resilience across
regional New Zealand while recognizing and maintaining the unique
values of Crown pastoral land.
LINZ is also making strong progress in its digital transformation,
including the use of automation and AI to improve how it
delivers services. AI is already helping staff
work more efficiently, from supporting faster responses in the customer hub
to analyzing large volumes of information and improving the quality and
consistency of written advice. These improvements are delivering
practical results, including reduced call handling times and more
timely service for customers.
And this focus on smarter, more efficient ways of working is also
reflected in continued investment in systems like
Landonline, which is increasing automation across the property
system and making transactions more efficient, accurate, and
reliable for New Zealanders.
Another critical role LINZ plays is in supporting New Zealand's maritime
safety and trade by providing trusted hydrographic information,
charts, and navigation data from across New Zealand, the South
West Pacific, and the Ross Sea of Antarctica.
Last year, LINZ and Maritime New Zealand received $28.6
million of government funding for the Maritime Digital
Transformation program.
This program will transform and transition maritime navigation from
paper charts to new digital data-driven products aligned with the global
standard, ensuring safe and efficient maritime travel
into the future.
Additionally, the Southern Positioning Augmentation Network, SouthPAN,
continues to deliver benefits with its early open
services with users across maritime, construction,
infrastructure, primary production, and local government.
As uptake grows over time, SouthPAN is expected to deliver
$864 million in economic benefits over
20 years through improved productivity, reduced risk,
and greater confidence in location information.
Uh, freshwater weed control is another area where LINZ is delivering important
results. I had the opportunity to visit Lake Wanaka earlier
with the chair,
uh, this month, and it was encouraging to f- see firsthand the progress being
made. And it's believed that the work in this lake is the largest,
bear with me if I get this wrong, Lagarosiphon,
uh, eradication program in the world.
LINZ has also recently undertaken preventative work in the Kaweroa
River, laying the equivalent of eight rugby fields of hessian
matting to stop the spread of the weed into Lake Waikaremoana.
And this work is vital for local communities, business,
tourism, and the environment.
Overall, LINZ is delivering practical outcomes that balance economic opportunity
with good environmental stewardship, and I look forward to continuing this
work. And with that, I'm open for questions.
Right. We'll go to Jo with the first question.
Thank you, Minister. It's nice to, uh, see you, uh, today
and, um, all the best for your hearing in upcoming
hearings. Okay, so Budget 2026-
Mm-hmm
... has cuts of 8.4 million over the forecast period for
LINZ, which I see budget documents claim
will be from efficiencies across the department's Crown land,
location-based information, overseas investment, and property rights
appropriations. Can you tell the committee what these specific
efficiencies
are? Because in your answer to question 2022, uh, sorry,
22-
Uh, 20-
... of the pre-hearing questions, you note that the primary risks arising from cost
reductions relate to reduced operational flexibility and
capability in enabling functions.
Can you tell us more about those reductions?
Uh, bear with me, I'll just find-
Yep
... the one for 22. Um, yeah, so look, in terms of Budget 2026
savings, uh, LINZ submitted 2.1 million, uh, in Budget
2026 baseline reductions. Um, and then LINZ will achieve
this through finding efficiencies and prioritization of critical work.
And LINZ will continue to evolve its operating model toward leaner
structures and cross-functional teams.
And I might just pass to-
Yeah, sure
... Jen.
So, um, while those efficiencies came out of those
appropriations, um, those were
appropriations that back office activities were covered
by. So what we've done is rationalized our,
our management. Um, one of the Dep Sec roles was,
um, revised, and, um, Nick is in a role
that's, um, also got a functional responsibility,
so we took out a Dep Sec role. We took out a number of, um,
management layers and me- and, and, um, brought together
teams to... And then we also looked at
particularly our, um, technology contract, and made
reductions there. So the 2.1 we were able to realize
without having any impact on frontline services.
So while it looks like it c- it has to come out of those appropriations,
that's where the back office is funded from.
Okay. So-
Does that make sense?
Yeah.
Yep.
Have they all been identified and confirmed as realistic, and you know that
you'll be able to get the savings if, that you expect from these efficiencies?
If not,
should you be concerned th- should be- we be concerned that you're saying you'll be
able to save 8.4 million and yet you don't know from exactly where?
Uh, no, look, I have every confidence, um, that LINZ will continue to maintain our
frontline services. And, you know, I've been given assurance that that is the case,
so.
So the question was, uh, do you know that you'll be getting the savings you
expect from these efficiencies?
Do you want me to answer that?
Yeah.
Yeah. So we have removed those roles now, so that from the 1st
of July, when these savings take effect,
um, the, the functions have reduced, and the
rationalizations occurred.
One last up.
Yep.
Thank you.
Um-
No sweat on that
... do any of these efficiencies and cost saving measures involve greater
user pays methods at all? If so-
Of what methods?
What are they? User pays.
Pays.
Oh, user pays.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Yeah. Um, so obviously there's a, there's a large component of LINZ's cost
recovery.
Yeah.
Um, and bear with me just a sec here.
Um, the 156.2 million, .29
million departmental appropriation under vote LINZ is
largely funded through third party revenue, and that includes
regulated fees and charges under the, uh, Land Information New Zealand
Fees and Charges Regulations, along with other funding arrangements.
So will they be increasing?
No. Perfect. Thank you.
You, Susanna.
Um, supplementary. So just to talk about workforce and,
um, supplementing what Steve already asked, really keen to
understand in terms of the reduction of head count, um, and the
way that teams or roles have been repurposed.
Um, has there been any impact on some of these projects that are of significance
across LINZ, um, including the Land Online
transaction system, the South Pan, and also the Marine
Digital Transformation. Um, do any of the roles that have been
impacted, um, have any, uh, part to play
within these projects?
No. They all have, um, separate funding lines, and they're all, um,
resourced and funded from the project money.
Um, just to supplement. And thinking about, 'cause, uh, LINZ is quite
a, um, specialist-
Yep
... area of work, and thinking about our workforce-
Mm-hmm
... um, what is the plan to both look to, uh, keep
an open door for the talent that might be needed while still trying to make the
cost efficiencies and the cuts that are required?
Yeah. As you identified, um, we have quite a specialist
workforce, and those specialist roles at this stage
aren't impacted. So we've been able to retain their
capability and attract it as well.
Kia ora.
Jo, you had another question.
Yeah. Thank you. Um, so your answer to pre-hearing question number
26,
uh, significant risks, notes that LINZ is operating in a constrained and
increasingly complex environment.
Key pressures include ongoing fiscal restraint, rising costs of
property and professional services, and heightened expectations from
central and local government, communities, and iwi partners.
Can you walk us through what these... what are these key pressures?
Yeah, I, I could probably give you a little bit of an overview, and then I might
pass to Jen. Um, yes, look, there's no doubt, um, there's been some inflationary
pressures.
Um, and so, uh, in terms of the properties, there's a broad range of properties
that LINZ, uh, manages and oversees.
Um, and, you know, I've been, uh, very interested in, um, in understanding how
we manage those and how we potentially divest, um, ourselves of those
properties that we actually don't need as well.
So obviously, if you're not managing them, you can reduce the management, uh,
pressures and costs.
Mm-hmm. So, um, we're looking at how
we can, um, both rationalize the service and, um,
make it more efficient. Um, I can get Nic to talk about
how we're utilizing and planning to utilize AI as well.
So shall I hand over?
Sure. Um, LINZ has been on quite a journey over the last
year. Uh, I think the environment has shifted from, you know, the
risk of using AI to, uh, the risk of not using AI.
So that's, uh, taught LINZ to navigate its new
environment, make sure that we've got the right, um, guardrails and
security and safety, while also looking for those opportunities
to enhance our customer service, um, while being
more efficient and productive. So we have an internal
AI accelerator that has been stood up, and the purpose of that
accelerator is to scale high-value, uh,
service delivery, where there are situations that there's, uh, lots of manual,
repetitive tasks, or situations that provide quite a lot of
administrative burden for our people.
So either speeding up delivery and service for our customer while also being more
efficient.
Mm-hmm.
So there's multiple opportunities that the accelerator's looking at.
Uh, the first is, uh, customer-facing services, where again, there's
high volumes of manual, repetitive work that can be automated.
The second is in areas like, uh, ministerial services, like
procurement, that again, it's repetitive tasks that can easily be
automated. And the final is in deep analysis,
uh, for example, in our policy submissions.
The work that we're doing in terms of analyzing large volumes of submissions,
um, looking at our summarization and advice-giving
using deeper analysis, using AI, means we can work faster.
So that's where some of those, um, service levels can stay the same while using
efficiency. In the policy space, we're actually taking a leading role.
We're now supporting other agencies, uh, with this, uh, policy
submission work, so we think it's gonna have broad benefits.
Yeah, Sue.
Yeah, I do. So you talked about, in that, in that, uh, number 26 answer,
the heightened expectations in, uh, from central and local government communities
and iwi partners.
Um, what are those heightened expectations? Can you talk us through that?
You know, I, I think, um, you know, it's, it's very complex in terms of, um, you
know, particularly relates to the Land Bank.
It's very complex and, um, you know, there's a number of properties that, um,
LINZ supervisors or managers, um, sometimes it's very hard to
ascertain how long they need to manage a property for.
It could be a month, a year, or five or 10 years.
It's, it is challenging and it is complex.
Um, but if I could just duck back to the AI, a, a very good example of the use of
AI is, and I mentioned it in my opening remarks, is reducing
the, uh, call handling times in the customer hub from 16 minutes to
12 minutes. Which may not sound much, but it's, uh, four minutes,
and which is actually a 25% increase in efficiency, which is a very good use of AI.
I know.
Yeah.
I just, I'm sorry, I just don't quite understand your explanation about...
'Cause the question was, what are the heightened expectations from central and
local government communities and iwi partners that you noted in your answer.
Yep.
Mm-hmm.
So what are those?
I'll get, um, Sonya to come and talk about, uh, her
property space.
Thank you.
Thanks, Nick.
Uh, kia ora koutou. Ko Sonya Wikitera ahau.
Uh, my substantive role is Head of Crown Property.
Um, we've got a number of, um, engagements, particularly in the community
and with iwi stakeholders and local stakeholders, uh, where
we are discussing, of course, um, the minister talked about aquatic weed-
Mm.
Um, terrestrial weed work, wilding pine work.
Um, and I think that probably reflects the heightened desire for
people in those communities-
Thank you
... actually to be rid of that kind of-
... um, pest and weed species. Yeah.
And the great work that actually we end up doing-
Mm
... not just with LINZ, um, but with m-many of the other government agencies and
also our partners.
Thank you.
Yeah
You had a
primary, Huhana
I did. You might as well stay there, aren't you?
So, I was wanting to talk about
Crown lands administered by LINZ, and in
particular, thinking about the land bank.
Seeing that the budget's been halved, basically, from 30
mil down to 16 mil-ish, in terms of the acquiring of
whenua and the preparation of lands for
settlement.
What's that going to look like in terms of the work program
available for the acquiring of new lands for land bank?
Yeah.
I
think the information that you've got, and I'm wondering if the CFO might jump up,
is from iPET adjustments that are made from year to year.
Mm-hmm.
We have quite a stable appropriation that we use
for purchasing of property to go into the land bank.
Yeah.
And it's been fairly stable for years.
If we don't, well not just us, but Te Tari Whakatoe, if they don't
spend the total appropriation-
Mm
... then they look for an iPET to transfer that to subsequent years so that they
can keep that pool of funding available
for the NPM purchases.
Mm.
Or recently, more private purchases.
So, um-
And how much is that if we've had budget stability across
that whenua?
I feel like I'm going to look backwards.
About
14 million, so.
14 mil.
14.
Oh, 14 mil across them all two?
Correct.
40.
14.
14. 14 mil, cool. Okay then, so
if we say that we have therefore budget stability for
acquisition of land and the management of land within the land
bank, wanting to understand, in terms of
maybe, I don't know who's appropriate to guide me through the process, but when we
have lands that are included in a settlement,
and then it's been prepared, it's been confirmed, signed,
all of that. We've had legislation go through the house.
What is the pathway for final change in title?
How long does that take?
I think that's Simon.
Yeah. Look-
So I've heard it's years, but you know, this is just me just speculating.
It can be
years in the making.
Mm.
So,
once the treaty legislation is passed, so obviously there's a huge process
that goes on beforehand. There is the negotiation process-
Mm
... which Te Tari Whakatoe manage, which I'm sure you're aware of.
But also iwi will go through Crown
owned land, not just what's in the land bank.
Mm.
But also Crown owned land from MOE,
and other government agencies to have a look at.
Mm.
And to make choices about whether or not they want those to be included as part of
their treaty settlement.
Mm.
So we don't have all of the land that might be available for a treaty settlement,
we just hold the land bank-
Mm
... which is the excess,
no longer used Crown assets, I suppose.
Mm. And so how long does it take for your specific types of land to
be transferred over to the iwi-
Yeah
... the title?
So most treaty settlements will have settlement day, or they might have
early redress properties, and they may go across before the legislation's
signed.
Mm.
The final legislation.
And then I think once the legislation's signed, there's also another
grouping of assets, which will be settlement day properties, which will go a-
across to iwi within about 20 working days-
Mm
... I think it is.
And then most treaty settlements will have time frames in them,
for deferred settlement properties, which usually are around two
to five years.
Mm.
And then most treaty settlements will have a right of first refusal,
which could then be on that land title forever.
Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah, so dep- it depends on which grouping.
Yeah.
We're obviously trying to ensure that we meet the deadlines that are
set out in the treaty settlement. So we make sure that we work heavily on the early
release and the settlement day properties.
And then we work with each of the PSGEs to work through
the list of the DSP properties or the RFR properties.
Recently heard anecdotally from an iwi
through settlement-
Do you want me to-
... that had started getting charged rates on properties that
had yet had their title transferred over to them.
Is that a council issue or a LINZ issue?
It's quite interesting that they started getting charged rates
from the time of settlement, yet they hadn't received the title over.
Mm. So I-
I could name the iwi.
Oh, no, you can probably provide that to me maybe later.
Yes. You're allowed to do that. Yes.
That would typically not occur.
Yeah. Mm-hmm.
So as we-
Is it a council issue?
As we know... Mm.
No.
So there could be a couple of things at play here.
So of course, when the title is transferred, that's normally when the
council's
getting the information about, you know, who to charge for the rates.
So that's usually when that occurs.
Mm.
Sometimes our tenants are responsible
for rates as part of their lease agreement.
So there could be a bit of, yeah, a bit of information in that, which would be
helpful.
So it's quite specific.
It's a specific question you would write to the-
Yeah
... write to the... Yeah, if you could.
Mm.
Dana had her sub on the-
Well, mine was kind of related to Huhana's question actually, but was about
the number, the sheer weighty number of
treaty settlement obligations that LINZ has.
Mm.
And I know that there are literally
hundreds, if not thousands. I think thousands is actually the number.
But just what focus goes on to those as an organization in terms of
getting them through the process so that they are keeping things moving.
Because it is, I think, the greatest number of all of the treaty
obligations That you have to deal with.
So we do have responsibility for inputting into
Te Haera, which is the system that TPK manages, obviously,
to ensure that all of the commitments are being done.
LINZ has an interesting role because not only do we have
properties that we need to transfer through settlement
day, deferred settlement, or RFR process, but LINZ is
also involved at the very last stage with all of those other Crown
agencies in the title transfer.
Mm.
So I'm going to- So that LINZ has an inflated number-
Mm
... um, of obligations in Te Haeta because we are either involved in the
process or we are at the very end of the process for every government
agency who are doing the, the sale, um, through to, um, our
PSGs.
Okay.
So I know that, uh, we have about 77% of our
commitments have been completed in Te Haeta.
Uh, I don't believe we have any that are overdue.
Obviously, we still have a number that we're working through.
Great.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Stuart.
Yeah.
You have a question.
Thank you, and welcome. I've, I've got a question about, uh, LINZ
blocks, land lock blocks, uh, particularly in North Canterbury.
I know you've seen some. Uh, and also the sale process of
those blocks. I, I...
Tidying them up 'cause they're not actually being utilized by LINZ, they're just,
uh, actually scrub land where amongst good farmland.
And, but when the process begins, and I've got
another incident,
uh, instance where, um, the land was, uh, the deal was sort
of going through, and then-
Of course
... LINZ decided to, uh, that they needed to do a
competitive tender at the last minute.
And so
sort of withdrew and started again.
So, uh, is that sort of thing,
I wouldn't have thought it was usual, and it's not usual b- business practice.
Uh, is that, is that under control or...?
Yeah, look, it's not something I can specifically comment on that, that-
Yeah
... particular situation, but, um, yeah, yeah, look, I'm certainly interested, as I
said in my opening remarks, about understanding, uh, what surplus land there is,
and there's no point to my mind actually, um, managing that if there's no interest
in, in, if it's not going into the land bank.
Mm.
And it's surplus to requirements, and I, uh, you know, because there's management
costs involved. But in terms of, as that specific example-
There's no management. It's not being managed.
Yeah.
So look, unless there's anyone else wants to make a comment on that then-
No, if you want to give us that detail we can-
I, I've given-
Yeah, yeah
... given the minister the details.
Okay. Okay.
But, um, slightly different but related in terms of the overseas
investment-
Mm-hmm
... um, Act. So there's one that's just been publicized and, uh,
recently a sale in Marlborough, the Kenepuru Sound, for a feedlot.
Mm.
Now,
I'm highly skeptical about the feedlot, given the likely
need to be a wharf build or built, or the roads won't be capable of bringing the
feed and all that sort of stuff, all those questions.
Mm.
And there are other... Uh, so I don't, don't need you to comment on that in
particular. The question is, what happens
in the process when an approval is given, say for a feedlot in a-
Yes
... a highly remote place that
seems uneconomic to anyone else or, uh, not sensible.
That, uh, that, that is followed through as a condition.
And, uh, what is the timeframe for, uh,
that to be delivered? Is that, is that a common thing or is it a
by agreement? And what is the, uh, what,
what are the
consequences of not delivering on that commitment?
Yeah, very good questions. Actually, it's something I've been particularly
interested in, is, um, uh, uh, to your question,
um, is, you know, when those conditions are posed, how are they monitored and for
how long?
Mm.
And exactly to your point, what are the consequences?
And I think there's a secondary part to that, is what happens when people try to
circumvent-
Yes
... that, that, that process as well.
I think there's sort of two quite separate things.
And I would make the observation that it is a privilege, uh, being able to invest
in sensitive land in New Zealand, and that comes with conditions, and those
conditions should be adhered to. So I think, John.
Petro.
Yeah, Petro.
Yes. So the,
e- e- every consent is subject to conditions of some kind.
They vary depending on the consent pathway and the subject matter.
Um, I can't speak to the specific case that you've raised, but a case like that
would generally have conditions that require the underlying development or business
to actually be developed and implemented.
Uh, and the failure to deliver that is tied again to a very specific condition that
requires those assets to be disposed of at, at LINZ's discretion
if, if that business isn't developed.
Um, depending on the circumstances around that, we've got a, a wider ability to
take action. We can take civil and criminal proceedings against people.
We can secure penalties. Um, looking back
10 or 11 years, um, I think we've taken over $13 million
in penalties and costs from investors who've either breached conditions or
who've, um, as the minister, um, says, have, uh, have
attempted to circumvent the rules in some ways.
Um,
the, a, a big part of the back end of that is in the publicity of that.
It's not just a, a quiet sort of slap on the wrist in a, in a back corner.
Um, the publicity and the, and the public attention of this is important.
We want other investors to know that if they behave well, if they're good
investors, if they're adding value to New Zealand, um, that they should be
encouraged to invest, but that there are rules that exist to protect New Zealand,
um, particularly New Zealand's national interest, and they will be enforced.
So just, uh, one final supplement if I can.
So, um, a- and using this example that I
raised.
Mm.
Um, there is no consent, nor has there been one applied for,
for that activity. Would that be usual?
Would it, what would normally follow if I was applying for a consent,
um, to, uh, to purchase sensitive land as a foreigner,
and that, um, that sensitive land was to do an activity that would
require a consent of some kind? Which, um,
would that need to be in place, or is, what happens if
I, I, 'cause there isn't one, uh, they don't get the consent, then what
happens in the process?
So it, it, it depends on the risk posed by a transaction, both
the risk of- A perceived risk of non-compliance, so something that's a bit out
there, we would tend to condition a little more prescriptively.
On the other end of the scale, a known investor who's got a long track record of
compliance, we would tend to condition a little less prescriptively or a
little more light-handedly. They're just a reflection of the risk
posed by the transaction. At the higher risk end of the scale, which I think
is the end that you're probably interested in,
we would look to potentially condition
a number of milestones along that development cycle.
So firstly, potentially the requirement to apply for resource building
consents, other consents may be required.
A requirement to obtain it, or potentially the requirement to break ground on a
development, that would be common, say, for new housing development.
A requirement to complete that development,
and then again, in the case of housing, to then on-sell it at the end.
That gives us a number of milestones along the way where we can intervene
if we need to. It's relatively unusual that we would need to.
At that lower risk end, we probably wouldn't have as many
of those milestones. It's adding cost for us and it's adding cost for the investor,
and there's no real risk-prevent need to intervene at that level.
I'm not on a witch hunt, but I was just-
No, no, no
... just wondering, and is that publicised?
It's a fair question.
To what level is that publicised, or is it not publicised, those
conditions?
The conditions are subject to the Official Information Act.
They're generally not proactively released other than in-
Okay
... high-profile cases. But people ask for them all the time, and when
they do, they're generally released, and when they're released, we then proactively
publish them on our website.
Thank you very much for your fulsome answer.
Sue's had a sup.
Oh, I've got a quick supplementary.
So you talked about the penalties and also the ability of
LINZ to take the land back.
Mm-hmm.
So, and you talked about penalties being up to $13 million.
So is that when you miss a milestone, does that automatically
trigger a penalty?
No, it doesn't automatically trigger a penalty.
It triggers our ability to seek a penalty.
Those penalties are all sought through the High Court.
We take proceedings against,
or High Court or District Court, we take proceedings against people, and the court
orders those penalties-
Well-
... to be paid
... that process can be quite an expensive exercise for the taxpayer.
Well, it's not as expensive as you'd think.
We're very good at what we do. It's unusual for somebody to
challenge us when we take those proceedings.
We've got a team of really good investigators who put these cases together.
And virtually all of the... The penalties aren't necessarily
agreed, but it's unusual for us to take a matter to court and for people not to
essentially accept that they've broken the
rules. We've got a pretty good track record of going
against those people. And on the cost to the taxpayer, these are round
figures,
but the penalties that we've recovered have met about three-quarters of the
Crown's cost overall of that entire enforcement
framework. So if you look at that Crown-funded element of
LINZ's
compliance and enforcement framework, about three-quarters of that has been
recovered to date from the penalties that we've received.
That's trending up. We've currently got five cases either before the
court or on the verge of being introduced, and three cases currently before the
court where we're waiting for penalties, and that will see that percentage of the
total spend trend up towards 100% or more over time, I
think.
Okay. So say, for example, I bought some land.
I was overseas, got permission to buy some land, said I was going to
plant a kiwifruit orchard, never got a consent, never planted the kiwifruit
orchard. At what point and what's the timeframe for when you'd kick in and
say, "Sue, you need to give it back to us," or, "Here's your fines, and then at
what point do we give it back?"
So it-
Like to give it back
... it depends on the circumstances.
So assume you got consent, so we've said you can buy it, and then you
haven't planted it. Our first question would be why didn't you plant it?
And if you didn't plant it because cyclone Gabrielle-
Well, I haven't even got a consent.
Sorry?
I haven't even got a consent.
Oh, if you haven't got any consent, as soon as we found out about that, we're going
to want to know why you didn't get consent.
Okay.
And we would look to move reasonably quickly after that, if we could.
Okay. Thank you. It's good to know that the-
Yeah.
Jamie.
Yeah, thanks, Chair. Thanks, Minister.
It's pretty much a spinoff of what we're discussing now, actually.
I'm concerned to see that despite this government's push to increase
foreign land sales, you've actually cut the appropriation for
compliance
and administration of the overseas investment
regime. Can you tell the committee the reasoning behind
that cut? Because it's the only part of the appropriation that you've
actually cut. Why not make these savings out of
ministerial servicing, which has remained the same, rather
than enforcement?
Bruce, uh -
I think it's Bruce. It's Bruce
... sorry, we'll get our CFO to-
Yeah
... to speak for a question.
So,
you're up, Bruce. It's in the CFO fund.
So the only actual reduction that we've made in overseas investment was
$100,000 as part of the cost savings initiatives.
The changes that you're actually seeing in there actually reflect the fact that
this is largely third-party funded.
So whilst we might have an appropriation of $13 million, we never actually
put that amount into the budget each year.
We only put into the budget the amount we think we're going to
recover in third-party
fees. So that's why you see it looks
like a drop, but we actually have a far higher appropriation, which
is just our ability to spend, but not the amount we actually intend to
spend each year. So we've probably kept our, our spend in that area has been
reasonably constant over
the last, at least as long as I've been here.
Okay. No, thanks for that feedback.
The other question I have is, how many approvals for foreigners to buy farm land in
New Zealand have occurred in the last 12 months?
Swipe out. Bruce may not be able to answer that one.
Sorry, I, uh-
No, that's all right.
It's what the people of New Zealand want to know, right?
Yep, yep. Absolutely.
Mm-hmm.
So, hi. I'm Anneke Tuerden. I'm the leader of the assessment team.
We do the overseas investment applications.
I do have stats for nine months. I can give you 12 months,
so just give me a
So under the Benefit to New Zealand pathway, in the last nine months, the
first three quarters of this year, we've made 42 decisions.
Unfortunately, I don't have that breakdown into farmland and non-farmland.
I'd say most are likely to be farmland, but we can give you those statistics.
Thank you.
We can provide that detail to you.
Yeah, thanks, minister.
Yeah.
I appreciate that. So how many of these approvals were
granted where officials found that the sale did not meet the Benefit to New
Zealand test?
So we don't grant cons-- If they're buying farmland, they need to meet the benefit
test, and they need to show substantial economic or-
Okay
... New Zealand participation benefits.
So every one of those will have met the threshold to-
Okay. No, thank you. Thanks for clearing that up.
No worries. Just, uh, sup to Suz on me.
No, I can't remember what it was, sorry.
Ah.
Primary.
All right, primary question from Hannah.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Minister, wanting to understand what does the, uh, land
portfolio look like in terms of old school properties that are
surplus and are sitting with LINZ right now in management?
Look, I probably can't get into that in detail myself.
It's all right. More officials coming. Yeah.
Yeah.
Sonia might be able to provide some details.
How's the portfolio looking?
Ooh. I couldn't give you the exact number of how many old
schools that we may have-
Yeah
... which obviously have come across and into the Land Bank.
Mm-hmm.
There's around 900 Crown-owned, um, properties.
And so with our schools, for instance,
we have those that might be utilized or might be
leased over time rather than sitting redundant.
And then others, we might free them up for disposal.
Can you reflect on any properties over the last 12 months maybe that
might have gone through for disposal of a school site?
Looking forward, Hannah, is the idea of the-
Oh, yes. How many schools are you proposing to dispose of in the next
financial year?
There you go.
Nice.
Now you're doing it.
There you're on fire.
Well, it's on, it's past as well as future.
So that's why I want to know how many schools you got and how many you want to get
rid of.
Yeah. So I don't know. We'll have to come back and give you the answer around the
number of schools that we proposed or have sold
that are in the Land Bank in the past.
There'll be a whole bunch of different components that go with each of
the schools. Some of them will be leased, of course, where they have some
commercial return-
Mm-hmm
... or they can be utilized, they will be leased.
Yeah.
Some properties
have not been leased because actually they're not suitable, uh, and nor
does the iwi actually want them to be remediated for,
you know, for a particular purpose.
They would actually prefer to do some of that work themselves.
So,
they're not all the same. They can't all be treated the same.
Mm-hmm.
That's probably where the, you know, having a great iwi conversation around
actually what their aspiration is for some of these properties helps.
We can do that in partnership, and then think about how it's
utilized, but also how it might be remediated or
not, uh, and when it might be disposed of.
One other question along the lines of land sitting in the Land Bank in terms of
27 memorial.
Monuments. Okay.
How do you manage both the data
understanding of where those lands sit, and then the process for
preparing for disposal or hand back over time or
change of title?
Yeah. So,
I think you're talking about the memorials process.
So in each of the treaty settlements, there'll be a number of
properties which we need to include a memorial on, on the title,
uh, to protect iwi interests and make sure that, uh, for the
future,
nobody makes a mistake-
Mm-hmm
... uh, and puts a property to the market, uh, without
considering the treaty obligations.
Yeah.
That's something that we reported to the Maori Affairs Select Committee, I think,
last year.
Mm-hmm.
It was a process improvement that we have made.
Yeah.
Uh, and we've-- we do that, um, I guess say very well now.
So, I think before you were talking about, you know, what do we do.
And on settlement day, we sign legislation.
Yeah.
We've got a list of memorials for each settlement-
Yeah
... uh, and that's a piece of work that's done immediately.
So we put all the memorials on, uh, they'll be tidied up within a couple of
days-
Mm-hmm
... um, to make sure that protection is there.
Kia ora.
Suzie's got a primary, and then we're going to Joe.
Right. Great to see you there, Minister, and thank you for your engagement so far.
I know that LINZ has proposed changes to the Crown Pastoral Lease
Act with the Crown Legislation Amendment Bill, and I just wondered a
couple of things really. What feedback have you received on this?
And also, when is this likely to be coming to the House?
And I may have a sub depending on your answer.
Depending on the answer. Thank you very much for those questions.
Look, I think the feedback's been great.
Look, I think it's been something that's been wanting for a long time, from
particularly the leaseholders. I think probably primarily the act is
about, is about allowing secondary activities,
um, and still protecting the environment.
So that may be for, you know, on part of the farm.
It might be a cherry orchard or-
Mm
... you know, tourism activity or something like that.
So,
I think it's, it will enable better
economic outcomes for the leaseholder.
And then as well, you know, the Crown gets a slice of that pie as well because the
rental income goes up proportionately to the income derived from that land.
So it's a bit of a win-win, and it's effectively an expedited process.
So it's about allowing increased economic activity.
So certainly the conversations I've had have been very positive.
And of course,
in terms of your second question, in terms of timeframe, uh, look, I'm not able to
give you a timeframe as to when it's due to come into the House, because the runway
is getting shorter and shorter as we speak.
So, but yeah, really looking forward to it.
And I think there's a whole lot of leaseholders very excited about the
opportunities.
Okay. So under the current legi- under the legislation as it's drafted, as you
understand it's drafted, is there any way that that land be plant-- that, that
land, the change in land use could be from pastoral to what, it doesn't
matter what it is now, could it be planted in exotic forest?
Could any of that land be planted in exotic forestry?
Look, in terms of
permitted activities, look, I think that's something that has been raised.
There's a broad range of views, one from yes and one from no from
our stakeholders. I think that's something that will get worked through in select
committee processes as it comes through.
But certainly, aware there's a little bit of a tension around what-
Right
... whether it's native versus exotic.
And one more. And could it be sort used as a,
trap on the track to selling it, selling the land?
The change of land use, could it be result in a sale?
Could it... You, are you talking if there was potential conversion?
Yeah.
And then could it be sold, the lease be sold?
I guess, look, any lease-
So if you created a different, if I built a, a water park-
Yeah
... on my land,
on the land, and then could I then sell that water park?
Yeah, look, I think that's something that we'll have to get worked through, in
terms of through the select committee process.
But look, it's an activity on that particular leasehold.
Yeah.
So it's like I don't think there's any, um,
any ability within the bill as it currently stands where you can carve out a piece,
your water park, and sell separately.
Okay.
You know, so that's something I'm sure we'll get worked through in select
committee. But certainly people are quite excited about the opportunity in the
outdoors.
Yeah. No, that's great. Thank you. I, and I respect that.
Jo.
Thank you. Minister, in response to some of the, the answer to some of the
pre-hearing questions that have come through, you note ongoing risks in
recruiting and retaining experienced staff in critical
specialist technical roles. In the broader system context of a
reducing public sector, what are these roles and
how important are they to you, and are these roles ones that
you would have to otherwise, otherwise have to contract for if you
can't employ them yourself?
Look, I probably can't answer too specifically.
I'll get,
possibly somebody to talk to. But in terms of, look, I, I had the very
good,
good fortune to go and spend a day with the, team down at Lynn's office in
Christchurch, and, they certainly talk a very different language than I can
understand in terms of technology.
They are doing some extraordinarily innovative and exciting stuff in
the technology space. But in terms of,
you know, I think somebody's perhaps better to answer about how unique those skills
are. But certainly not my area of expertise.
Mm-hmm. Yeah. I can take some of, some of that.
Right.
We have a lot of specialist hydrographers-
Mm
... geospatial specialists-
Yeah
... geodesists,
along with technology, people, the big projects that we're,
we're doing at the moment. We are investing a lot
to, to, support the retaining of that
capability. We're doing a lot of training.
We've taken on a lot of grads as well to actually-
Mm
... employ pe- like, like train people from the grassroots.
So we're looking at a whole lot of strategies to address that.
In a lot of these areas, they are, they're world-class
specialists and so,
our, our national hydrographer has just been successful in being,
appointed to a director of the International Hydrographic Office.
Now, a national hydrographer you don't find walking along the street.
Mm-hmm.
So we're having to go to an international recruitment for that role.
Mm.
And it's not somebody that you could train up, quite
easily. So it's a constant challenge,
that we are, managing.
But there are some unique roles and specialist
roles that we do have to constantly be
looking at how we can, succeed from them as well.
We have an aging work, workforce, of specialists as well.
So we're really aware of that in, in ensuring particularly these
big projects that we're delivering, that we've got the capability to do
that.
And so if you aren't able to recruit or if you aren't able to retain, then you have
to contract them out? They can't get permanent.
At the, at the very extreme-
Okay
... end. But with some of these special, really specialist roles, you can't even
find contractors.
Okay.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Puhana.
Oh, yeah. I wanted to ask a question particularly around some of these big
projects that you've been going, or, uh, you've been delivering, 'cause last year
we had the intro on-
Mm-hmm
... the Marine, Digital Transformation Project.
Yeah, sure.
So, getting a bit of an update on what that looks like, where, how it's heading.
But also in particular in that marine space, knowing that we have,
mana whenua groups, we have Rohe Moana, we have
MACA claims and all of those types of things.
What does the project governance look like for this-
Mm
... at a national level, and then how it drills down into like...
I know, I know it's digital.
Yeah, yeah.
It's definitely satellites-
Yeah, yeah
... but, what does that look like in terms of the way that this project interacts
with Tangata Whenua, their rights and, and-
Yeah, sure. I'll, get Michael to come forward because it
flows into the, coastal mapping as well.
Mm-hmm. Yeah.
Yeah. They handed-
Yeah.
Good com- committee members. Michael Effe, out here, head of Location Information.
So you referenced the Maritime Digital Transformation Project, and as the
minister, said in his, opening remarks, it really is about
modernizing, New Zealand's maritime navigation services.
And it's probably one of the biggest upgrades,
30 years. So it is really an investment into the future
of, of what our maritime navigation services will look like.
So,
we got funding through Budget '25.
Mm.
It's been delivered in partnership between ourselves and Maritime New Zealand.
So we both got allocated some funding to deliver.
In terms of where we're at with the project, so we're a year in,
and I would describe the last year as really the focus being on
mobilizing the project. So, that's really been bringing
resource in. We've secured some key vendors that we've needed
to secure around some of our data migration work,
and really- Setting the foundations around some of
that governance project hygiene work, and we've made some progress there,
which has been great.
In terms of the focus for the project at the moment, it
really is around the foundational data migration that is
required to enable these future
services to be rolled out to the
maritime industry. We're looking at doing a lot
of that data migration foundational work through to
early 2027, at which point we're going to really start
to move through into rolling out some pilots,
and working through a stage regional rollout through to
2029, which is when we are looking to have the project completed
and these new services and products-
Will it be done by 2029? This will be done.
That's the goal.
Mm-hmm.
That's certainly the-
Sure
... the funding envelope is time-bound.
Mm-hmm.
So our funding goes through to 2029.
Ticking minister. Yeah quickly.
We're making good progress.
It is quick. Yeah.
I think as well, this is in response to
the international
expectations around these standards that are expected
across the world to be met. So,
whilst we will be offering these new products and services, we will be
continuing to be running both the new and the old
for quite some time because there will be a period of adoption that will
take years and years to be working through.
Just touching on that second part of your question around-
How do you work with Māori
... yeah, so,
and probably there's a few projects there that I think is
relevant. So we've got our Maritime Digital Transformation project,
which is in its early stages.
I would say that our governance has been focused on getting
our limbs in Maritime New Zealand joint governance
processes up and running, which has gone well.
The teams are working really hard on
what does our engagement and adoption look like
for a vast array of users, and that could go from your
mandated vessels, your cruise ships that are coming in, down to your
boaties
and everyone in between.
We're working through a process around, hey,
what does engagement look like in relation to our stage
rollout of products and services?
It's probably still in the early stages of being developed, but I would certainly
expect that we would be engaging with Iwi Mana
Whenua as required, and particularly utilizing some of those
channels that Maritime New Zealand have that we don't have readily
available to us.
Maybe I'll just touch on briefly the 3D coastal mapping project,
which I think is a bit more relevant to
that kind of engagement with Iwi. So,
through budget 2023, we got funding for the delivery of
3D coastal mapping project, which was effectively
the project is to map up to 40% of New Zealand's
coastline.
There have been real challenges in the past around, we've got some good data about
the land, got some good data about the sea, but there's this coastal
zone that is a real gray area. So this is really a chance to establish some
baseline data. And
it wouldn't be a LINZ select committee hearing without some handouts, but I won't
give them to you unless you want them.
We've had those big maps before.
Oh, I got some
big maps.
Mm.
Yeah. So,
the project is midway through
its program
timeline. I think we've mapped
34% of the project scope, and I think 14% of
that has been published. So we're getting that data out there
as it is being collected and processed.
I think importantly, in relation to engaging with others, we've set
up an advisory group. So whilst there's some project governance that
sits over the top of it, the team is out there engaging with
a number of agencies who are interested in this data.
We have Iwi representation on that advisory group, regional
councils, university and commercial
users. And what we really want to be doing is ensuring that,
A, they know the data is available,
they're aware of how to use it, and is it meeting their expectations.
And I think what we
really want to understand from them is hearing how they are using this data
and the value that it is adding.
Yeah. 100%.
Because it is
really rich data for a whole range of
benefits. Yeah.
Kia ora.
Suz.
Wilding pines are a problem.
Mm.
And like thousands of other New Zealanders, I was absolutely
delighted with the budget 2026 announcement about the government's
commitment to eradicating wilding pines.
So thank you for that, and Tongariro National Park and the Mighty River
thanks you as well.
Mm-hmm.
And full credit to our chair, Miles Anderson, who's been championing this issue
for the last two and a half years. But I just wanted to ask, what actions are being
taken in regard to LINZ land in terms of
eradicating these beasts, pests?
Yeah. Look, thank you for the question, and I will
get Sonia De Klerk to talk about some of the different trial methods they've done.
But to your point, an extra 79 million, 109 million
total, I think there's a lot of very relieved New Zealanders, and
acknowledge the work that Miles has done, and probably a number of other-
Yeah, and-
... committee members as well around the table.
Joseph, yeah.
Stuart, Joseph, Joe.
And also too, just acknowledge all the work that those wilding control groups have
done up and down the length, particularly in the South Island.
They're very, very passionate about protecting the march of the
wilding tree, and they've fought that good fight for a number of years.
So there's some quite exciting trial methods
underway in terms of how to best manage them.
So yeah, perhaps Sonia might like to talk you through some of those
Keen to my heart to talk about wilding pine.
Yeah.
So obviously, a great advocacy network, and we work with them
up and down the country. So the majority of the funding you're talking about, it
will be administered by MPI-
Yeah
... under that national wilding
control group. And they work with a bunch of stakeholders,
so obviously with the two biggest landowners, which is LINZ
and DOC, and also Defense is involved in that.
Hmm.
And they've also got sitting on that governance and also in their steering
committees where they decide how to prioritize money,
different stakeholders. So, Federated Farmers, and other
interest groups, and Wilding Pine-
Action Group
... have this. Yep. It involves all the way up from national
governance, all the way down to actually how they're delivering on the ground.
I think the beauty about that is then it's captured in a national program.
It consolidates interest through regional councils, and district
councils, and they also make a contribution to that program, obviously to get in
front of the wilding pine issue, in their areas.
So I think that system works really, really well, and everyone has been
advocating
to have more money and have more control work.
So I'm not going to talk about how they prioritize that.
LINZ has
heard of a couple of areas particularly which haven't been able to been touched by
the national program,
where we have made some funding available.
So,
quite historic reasons as to why the wilding
has taken off. So one example is in the Mackenzie,
in South Island.
Fairintosh.
Yeah.
Mm.
And while our pastoral leaseholders are typically responsible for
managing pests and weeds on their property,
as we know, and we've seen lots of videos, this stems from a lot of the
erosion control, throwing seeds out of helicopters,
planting on really tough terrain, thinking they were going to be a good
thing, and then we have realized that they are not.
And so leaseholders in these places
have really struggled with managing their own control,
over time and have not been able to get in front of it, and
Fairintosh is one of those. So we don't always do work on pastoral leasehold land
because actually that's the role of the pastoral leaseholder.
But in Fairintosh there's been information dated back about 50
years around how they've been trying to tackle this issue.
So it gave us a really interesting example of
using some innovative suppliers.
So again, under the national program, LINZ funded some extra
money to go into this space.
And they've done things a little bit different,
because they've tried to be innovative and carry out as much weed
control as they can. So,
they have harvested logs where they could.
I'm going to call them B-grade logs.
And they have used them either for selling or for using for the
biofuel, so making them into chip, and carting them off to Timaru.
They've found a market for that, which means that then they're able to do more of
the control work.
They've also used these massive mulching machines,
and if you ever get out that way, you definitely need to have a look at it.
I don't want to mime what it looks like, but it's a massive head
that goes on top of this massive-
No, it's in idea
... I want to call it a crane, and it literally mulches the tree all the way down
to the ground,
which had been a bit of an experiment here,
and it's been really successful, and it creates a really thick
layer of mulch on the ground, which is slowing the
seedlings again from coming up. Because normally you'd have to go back and do
ongoing weed management. So LINZ is trying to
contribute. It's great that we've got more money in that national program.
Fairintosh is a good example with some innovative suppliers, and we've
just kicked off a piece of work also in Middo.
Stuart has a supplement.
I've got a couple of points, actually.
Ah. Delete.
So Sir Robert Muldoon wrote a letter assuring
people because the damage was caused by the government, by the Forest Service
and Department of Conservation. They actually literally planted a shelter belt-
Yeah
... up in the Central Valley above the snow line-
... trying to stop hills from eroding.
Silly pastime really, but anyway.
But they brought in invasive species like Scots
pine and pinus contorta.
It's terrible.
So those are the... It's quite different in
where my part of the world is,
58,000 hectares in Letham and Branch
Valleys, which is totally choked with wildings.
And at the High Country Field Days
last year, not this year, they were talking about burning.
I didn't go to the one this year, but they talked about the good results that
they've had burning wildings
because it actually kills the seed in the soil,
and the good results they had with natives coming up through
afterwards because they don't have that competition.
But are LINZ looking at burning?
So we wouldn't make that decision solely by ourselves.
So that would be done under that national program.
Yeah.
And of course, with Fenn's engagement.
So-
I know that they are thinking. There is a piece of,
there's some hectares left at Fairintosh that we are considering whether that would
be a good candidate for burning, because we've made a very natural fire break
around it-
Hmm
... and it's really difficult to access.
Well, I might... I should have rephrased that question.
Do you have any objection to it being burned, put it that way?
Not generally.
We just, it has to be very careful, of course.
Not if it achieves the outcome that we want, Stuart.
Yes. Well, yeah. But some people are quite strongly
against it just for philosophical reasons, not for good land
management reasons.
We've got one-
Super quick. Oh, sorry.
Sorry. One final question from Susan to finish.
Yeah. That $109 million a year, what if that is admin
cost? Is that all boots on the ground getting rid of the trees?
How much of that is going to be taken up with admin costs?
You'd have to talk to-
The MPI
... MPI.
It's really a question for the MPI.
I know that they contract-
It's sort of not in there.
Yeah.
Not in your... Okay. Thank you very much.
The pines must go.
Yes. Thank you.
Thank you, team.
Thank you.
Appreciated your time. Thanks for your answers, and there
may be a couple of written questions come through later.
Mm-hmm. Thank you.
Yeah, you got off lightly with the Shannon houses, just so
you know.
Waiting. Waiting.
She was waiting for that.
Are you ready for it?
Couldn't do it to you.
I was waiting, Susan.
You were cool.
Thanks, guys.
We all were.
One
and all, and Mike again.
So, you're here to talk about your role as
Associate Minister of Agriculture.
I note it's been raised that for
hearings that are under one hour, you only have three minutes to
summarize.
Yeah.
Only three minutes to hear.
Sorry.
Hey, look, thank you. Thank you for having me here.
Look, I'll just keep the remarks very brief.
I've got a very privileged role, Associate Minister of Ag.
My delegations are arable, organic, catchment groups, water storage,
and Māori agribusiness. Really excited about all of those.
I think, I'm a sheep and beef farmer, but
rural New Zealand and primary sectors are going through a really good patch at the
moment.
And obviously, the field days, the SOP was launched.
I see it in front of you, I'm sure everyone's read it.
But stunning, the successes, notwithstanding there are a couple of sectors that
are
challenged at the moment.
64.3 billion export income, 15.3%
GDP, 360,000 New Zealanders work in the primary sector, roughly
one in six, maybe one in six and a bit.
And 70,000 businesses associated with it up and down the length
of the country,
and about 82% of our export income.
It is significant, and I think it's something that we should celebrate.
In terms of the delegations, arable, I can just touch on each
one very briefly.
Arable is certainly under significant pressure at the moment,
and I think in large part, Canterbury in particular, and that's on the
back of two consecutive weak years, and then almost
a coup de grâce with a pretty significant hailstorm came through as
well. And then obviously, combining with fuel
prices and international demand as well, but they're an integral
part of our primary sector. They're a $2.6 billion industry.
About $325 million of that is export income.
That's down 4%, but significantly, they export
about 40% of the world's carrot seed, 50% of the world's white
clover, and a bit over half the world's radish.
But the point I think to make with the arable sector is,
our primary producers in New Zealand are not going to produce a
liter of milk or a kilo of lamb chops without someone growing that new
generation of tetraploid ryegrass. So, that's arable.
Organics is a very interesting sector, a very quickly growing sector,
$1.18 billion
within the New Zealand economy, of which about 606.7, I think,
million of that is exported, growing very quickly.
The
Māori agribusiness, really excited about that, and I've just
recently attended Ahuwhenua Awards.
We got to celebrate some incredibly successful horticultural businesses,
and they're a significant part of our primary sector in New Zealand.
30% sheep and beef,
30% forestry, 40% fishery/aquaculture,
10% dairy, and I think 5% to 10% horticultural, rail.
Correct me if I've got that wrong.
Really excited about the potential to lift up a large part of
that landholding that they have, which actually
aligns with our economic growth agenda and our goal to double
export value within a 10-year period, and I think they have a significant
part to play in that,
and really excited about the opportunity there. Catchment groups.
Interestingly enough, CCA or
Catchments Collective Aotearoa, are here in the building today as we
speak. So, I'm sure some of you might have already ducked up there and
seen them today. I would just make the point, I think the catchment groups are
really important And it's actually just a
continuation of the investment that our
landowners, farmers in New Zealand have made in
protecting their environment.
That's right.
That they have previously done, and will currently do, and will continue to do so.
As evidenced by QE 2, 186,000 hectares of QE 2
is a good example, and also think dairy sector, they've fenced off
23,000 kilometers of waterways.
So I salute them on all the good work that they do.
Really excited about that, and $40.5 million funding.
And then lastly, I think,
was water security and storage. And I think the point
I would make with some of these delegations, they actually interlink.
I think, water I describe as our superpower.
We have 12 times the world average per head of population, yet we use 4% of it.
And I would make the comment that growing stuff is generally not too complicated,
just add water at the right time. And that is one of our key enablers to
unlock growth. And I think, for example, in Gisborne,
52% of vineyards have been pulled out, and there's certainly a lot of
interest from the iwi groups who I've been engaging with lately
about potentially kiwifruit, for example.
But very difficult to make a strong business case if you don't have reliable
and secure water supply.
So really excited about all of those.
So apologies if that was a little bit over three minutes, but happy to take
questions.
Right, we'll go first to Jo.
Thank you. Thank you, Minister. What specific lines in the budget relate to growing
the organic sector?
Look, I don't have any-- My delegations were effectively
to advocate
for these
delegations I have. I think
organics is very interesting. Actually, I went to the Fonterra
Organics Awards night in Taupō recently.
They were certainly very excited.
They're $14 a kilo
of milk solids,
and
next season $14 a kilo as well is predicted.
It's actually about a 44... My maths might be a little bit wrong, but it was about
a 44% increase over conventional
milk supply. And of course, Fonterra have got moves to
move into the South Island as well, plans to move into the South Island.
Have you identified any barriers to growing the organic sector?
Sorry, have I-
If so, what are they?
Yeah, look, I'll probably get Ray to talk about some of the access to market, I
think, which is important. I
would make the comment, I think the organic sector is a sum of
all parts. They're very much a part of our export profile.
Pretty significant increase in growth compared to conventional.
But there's obviously some issues around getting equivalents into markets.
And of course, access to markets is critical, because access gives you the
ability to put your product into the market.
But perhaps Ray might want to talk about where we are.
Yeah.
What we're keeping our eyes on.
Yeah, I think probably that's the critical thing is just getting that equivalence
grant with the EU.
And there are other opportunities in the United States as well, just in
having that recognition of our organics program here in New Zealand much, much more
strongly. So certainly, we've been talking to colleagues internationally.
I think that'll stand us in really good stead.
So yeah, I think it's taken a little while to move that bit of
thing through the standard process and get everyone on board, but I think we'll
have a much better underpinning for our product internationally.
What's the minister's target for growth in the organic sector
over the next four years, and how will the budget investment contribute to it?
Look, I don't have a specific target other than, we know we need
to grow our export income, and we do that with combination of two things.
One will be value, and one will be volume, and not necessarily one or the
other. I think it will likely be a combination of the two.
But in terms of what Ray's touched on about the equivalents, access to
market is actually critical,
and access such as like the free trade agreement with India.
Access gives us options, and I think, not just organics, but
all parts of our primary sector. We need that access, and I think the
benefits are the proof is in the pudding.
I look at the China FTA, for example.
In 2008 when that was signed, we exported $1.78
billion of food and fiber to China.
End of March this year, in the latest SOP, it's predicted to be
19.2 billion, I think it's now. So it's
significant, and so it's a combination of a number of things.
And since you've been the minister and your interactions that you've had with the
organic sector, have they specifically identified any barriers to growing the
sector at all?
Look, I think
barriers, look, I think people will choose to, I'd make an observation, people will
choose to go organic for a couple of reasons.
One will be financial reward, i.e.
some very excited dairy cockies in Taupō the other night.
That significant premium, and that might encourage other people to develop.
And there was actually an individual who's
going to use milk powder from the organic sector overseas.
So that will drive demand or a shift, potential shift.
And the other one, I think, is people will
grow organics.
They'll just get personal view about the benefit of it.
Sorry, my question was, have they identified any barriers to growing the
organic sector?
No, I don't think so. It's a free market, right? And it's voluntary.
It's not compulsory.
Yeah. Thank you.
But I think those are the two reasons why people make a choice to go
into growing organics, and maybe a combination of those two.
Steve, you had us up.
Yeah. So given that there's no budget for this, why has
the government chosen to spend money, for example, on
Agri Zero, which has spent over
340 million bucks over three years or four years with very
little results.
When in the organic sector, you not only get a better price per
kilo, you also get positive outcomes on climate emissions, you get
positive outcomes on animal welfare, you get better outcomes for fresh water.
Wouldn't the government be better to spend at least some money in that sector-
In terms of your sustainability goals
Well, look, I would dispute some of what you just said there, Steve.
I think there's not necessarily better outcome, improved animal
welfare outcomes. I think-
In great fields
... I think everybody here that farms
tries to farm their animals and look after them as best as they possibly can.
What about climate, though?
Yeah, and look, I think that's certainly not my delegation.
But in terms of it, I think it is important.
I think, the comment I would make
before Ray may want to say something, is we're a trading nation.
Yes.
We're a trading nation of five million people and we export 90% of what we grow.
Mm.
And
approximately, I think it's about 73% of what we export is
into markets with free trade access,
and that is critical. And there are climate narratives and environmental narratives
within those most lucrative free trade agreements.
We are vulnerable in that regard. We do need to play our part.
And,
yeah, so I think they are important, Steve.
So-
I don't have a sup on that, but I've got my primary still, if that's okay.
You want it in on that?
Yes. Yeah, you're next, actually. You're right.
Yes. So my primary's on arable.
You rightly point out that arable's having a hard time right now.
Yeah.
And
we've got what's been described as the Godzilla El Niño
event coming up, possibly predicted to be the hottest year on record,
2027.
Where do you see the role is for
the government or yourself with that delegation
to support an arable sector that is struggling-
Yep
... given its necessity,
in terms of broader food security-
Mm
... food resilience as well, because we currently import a bunch of grains.
Yep.
And do you think that this is a space where
you want to see better outcomes for
protecting the ability for us to feed ourselves, such as
more arable?
Yeah, look, I think I'll start off.
As I noted, there's been a particular set of circumstances for the arable
sector. The bulk of the arable sector is in Canterbury.
Yes.
They've had two extremely... We're talking about El Niño.
Yeah
An extreme dry. They've had the opposite-
That's right
... they've actually had extremely wet conditions-
Yeah. Yeah, right
... as well as the hail storm, which was pretty-
Three hail storms
... pretty swell. So, sorry?
Three hailstorms.
Yeah. So, it is just unfortunate. And look, Steve, I've farmed all of my
life, and farming is about going through cycles.
Mm.
I would like to... And I have met with,
Far and Sarah Clark and Scott Champion-
Mm
... and David Burkett, Federated Farmers' arable rep.
And we've had multiple conversations about it.
The reality is there is no magic button-
Mm
... for the arable sector. If there was or a lever we could pull, we would pull it.
Mm.
Yeah.
I would hope that we're potentially just at the bottom of one of those
cycles, and I think it can be very challenging.
Certainly, my career as a sheep and beef farmer, when you're at the bottom of a
cycle, you can forget to look up. Just like sometimes when you're
riding the top of the wave, you can forget to look down.
It has always been cyclical.
Mm.
I think part of my role is to advocate in terms of, and just talk about
how they are interconnected with
all of our primary sector. They have done an initiative.
I've actually brought a sticker here. They have launched New Zealand Grown Grains.
Mm.
Which is effectively a shop local, buy local.
So, it'll be interesting to see how that could grow as well.
And also, focused on making sure that they've actually got a voice-
Mm
... as well to advocate and talk to.
MPI have been working very closely with them.
Mm.
And I'd just like to acknowledge the work that Ray and his team have been doing.
And Ray, actually, you might want to talk about what you've been doing.
Yeah, I think there's two things. One is getting alongside these folks,
and particularly Canterbury and in, for different reasons, in Hawke's Bay.
Mm.
But,
the Primary Sector Growth Fund is an opportunity that we put in front of
the arable sector leaders.
Mm.
And we said, they are starting to bring together a bit of a
plan about how they kind of lift the sector up a bit, and we want to back that to
one. So, I think we want it to be industry led.
We want them to kind of come forward with the ideas a bit, and then we'll be able
to kind of get in and give them a bit of support if there's some financial help
that would make a difference to advance any sort of initiative that would improve
their lot.
So there is potential for financial support?
There is potential. Yeah, and so the Primary Sector Growth Fund, we will back
40% in. So if they've got an initiative that they want to take that they think
would make a difference with a bit of a plan, we'll take that up,
and we can get in behind that. So, I think they probably will come forward with
something.
Mm.
And as I said, we sort of want them to drive it.
We can support that.
Because we're seeing farmers quitting arable in Canterbury and switching to dairy.
Yes.
And that's a problem for us, right?
Well, not necessarily. I think, and some of them might switch to other forms of
farming as well.
But,
look, this is the cyclical nature of each particular part of the
sectors. Sheep and beef went through a bad patch for a period of time.
Beef, dairy has gone through rough patches as well before too.
Mm.
So, recognizing that, but I think also particularly acknowledging the
work that Ray and his team are doing, and there's multiple conversations.
So, that's really helpful.
Thank you. Cushla.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Tēnā koe, Minister.
Tēnā koutou katoa. I'll ask a question with a couple of legs, so I
don't have to keep supping.
Can you quantify, Minister, the total appropriation for
Māori agribusiness in 2026?
I know that there's a 2% target reduction in
spending. Are you able to give any detail about how
that will affect Māori agribusiness?
Mm.
And given-
That you described your main role as advocacy.
Yeah.
And you have rightly pointed out the key players that Māori are
in agribusiness. What specific
ways are you going to advocate for their growth?
Yeah. Look, in terms of-
You, you, can you
Yeah, giving you.
Might stand to come up. But, yeah. Oh, look, I'm really excited.
To the second part, of course, uh, is I'm really excited about the
potential.
And, as you know, I've shifted all up the East Coast, and
there's some stunningly potentially productive farmland up there.
And I've seen the best and the worst, and I think there's...
There are a number of extremely competent and top-end
Māori
farms,
and I just think there's so much potential to bring the rest up.
And of course, it, it is about employment and opportunities and growth and all
those good things. So in terms of the specifics,
I'll talk to Ian.
Kia ora. Tena koutou te kōmiti. Before I answer the question, just want to
acknowledge that many of you have, have been very active in the Māori space,
particularly when it comes to agricultural awards. It's always great to see you.
Thank you for your support. The question of budget,
so, in relation to Māori Agribusiness Pathway and those other
programs, it's 8.2 million per year,
and it's a multi-year appropriation, so it spans over the next four years.
And in relation to Greenhouse Gas Māori Lead Solutions, that's
4.7 per year, also a multi-year appropriation over four years.
I think, I think it was adjusted when we wanted.
Think about the previous budget, just, just
trying to recall, it might be carrying through the years.
That might be the 2 million you're talking about.
2%.
Target reduction.
Oh, target reduction.
Yeah, yeah.
Ta- uh, reduction in what was the target? To do what?
To... Reduction in spending across the board.
Oh, reduction in spending.
Yeah.
Well, 2% is pretty small.
I, I'm not quite sure what that is. Do you know?
30 million.
30 million for-
I've got a question if she doesn't-
Yeah. No, it's just some specific program, is it?
Stop it. I've got a question.
I think she's got it.
Oh, are you talking about the 2% across MPI, not Māori Agribusiness-
Yeah, and how will that impact Māori Agribusiness-
Oh, beg your pardon. I can deal with that, yeah. It won't.
So the Māori Agribusiness team's relatively small.
We had made-- We, we made some adjustment back in that previous
restructure we did. I think we made some, some small adjustments here that went to
it, but the, the 2%, uh, reduction won't affect Māori Agribusiness.
And Minister, you talked about employment, et cetera.
That's great. What does that look like in terms of
real initiatives, work? Any projects that you've got in mind?
Yeah. Look, I, I, I went up to, um, I went up to Whangarei,
um, for the, for the awards, but also, um,
went out and had a look at a, uh, one of those water storage dams
and, um, saw the berries that they are growing there and the value they've been,
not only add to their local economy, but the jobs they've been unable to create.
And I think it's a number of initiatives like that, um, what will prove very
beneficial. And the following day, we actually went and had a look at a water
storage dam in Dargaville, um, which was really exciting and of course, we peer
review trust. Um, they, they have a fast track application in, and it would be
very remiss of me, too,
um, if you indulge me to not, uh, just congratulate, uh, the Ahu
Whenua winners, and it was horticulture this year, so, uh, Matai Pacific
iwi collective and also the, um, Young Māori Grower
Award, uh, was Te Rima Jive. It was a great
night.
Um, since you've mentioned water-
Mm.
Um, and you know there are a number of water storage projects going on.
Mm-hmm.
What is your approach in terms of working with iwi around
custodial rights,
um, when dealing with water storage proposals?
Yeah. Look, I, I think just broadly, um,
and, and as I've-- It's about the conversations that have been had, and, and I
think,
I think we've probably seen a maturity in terms of New Zealanders about
the importance of water.
Um, water is jobs, and yes, we, we can grow stuff on our land
with water, uh, but we also need water in our towns, and we also need water in
our commercial businesses. Think freezing works, processing companies, uh,
sawmills, and things like that. So I think there's a little bit of an
awakening with that. And, um, it-- I think it's incredibly
important that we actually talk about it and get it right, about how important it
is, yes, to unlock jobs, but also to protect our
existing businesses, uh, both on the farm and in our towns and
our cities.
Um, so look, um, and the iwi I've certainly engaged with, they, they, uh,
certainly understand that and very excited about the potential.
Um, I was at a Federation of Māori Authorities dinner awards the other
night as well,
and, um, certainly, I, I would reflect a number of those conversations were
about how important water was and unlocking growth.
Yeah, really excited, but I think we've got to get it right.
One more question. Thank you. Speaking of unlocking, um,
land utilization is a big issue for, um, Māori,
uh, accessing capital on land.
Um,
how do you intend to facilitate
easier use of whenua Māori?
Yeah, in terms of particularly that, that, uh, land that's landlocked? Yeah.
Landlocked land-
Yeah
... accessing capital on whenua Māori.
Yeah, landlocked accessing capital is, is a challenge.
I think there's a number of things. Um, yes, you do need to be able to access it.
Um, pretty hard to farm if you can't get to it.
Um, I think, um, I-- and look, I won't delve into it too much, but I think, uh,
yes, access to capital,
um, but also, uh, governance, because actually they go hand in hand.
If you don't have a good s- governance structure, very difficult to make a good
business case. So I think there's a number of things that actually need to be
lined up. But again, I come back to, um, you know, MPI
and, uh, Ian and his team do amazing work out there
engaging, um, with Māori, uh, community, and, uh, I'm
really excited about the potential. Really, really excited.
Yeah, and sorry, and Glen might just want to tack onto that.
Yes.
If that's all right, Chair?
Yeah, okay.
Yeah. If Glen was perhaps just able to add a little bit onto that.
So just on your specific question, through some of the program funding that we do
have, often, the way to capital is through feasibility work and other things, which
put them in a position to then go after the capital through other
avenues. So,
some specific examples, we've worked with projects where,
like Turanga Fast Five, not far from, well, within your electorate.
Mm-hmm.
Where some feasibility work was done, which allowed them then to go and get some
ref funding.
Mm-hmm.
So often, our program work unlocks that key or gives them the
chance to have a crack at it.
Yeah. You had a sap border one and water storage still.
Mm-hmm.
Oh, hang on.
I've got the Maori one.
We've got a sap here
and a sap here.
Thank you. I just-
Related to Cush is the-
On page twenty-
Mine was to Cush too.
On page 29 of the estimate of appropriations, I just wanted to
ask about the Integrated Farm Accelerator fund, and I
notice, halfway down the page, where you think that
the intention with that appropriation is to achieve significant acceleration and
broadening of the uptake of an integrated approach to farm planning, and
then how performance will be assessed and end of year reporting requirements.
I note that the number of Maori farm businesses supported to adopt integrated
farm plans through clusters or collectives,
there's a deleted performance indicator, and that is because
it is due to limited funding for this appropriation.
I just want to know why that has changed
from previous years.
Um,
I'd have to go back and check for you exactly on that
line.
Sure.
But what I
do know is the Integrated Farm Plan program
has effectively concluded.
It was an initiative with the previous government that hasn't been continued.
Okay.
And so the funding has probably concluded with it.
Early, I think,
and also we did make some adjustments to that climate
related funding in that area. So I suspect that's what that is.
Could we or-
Yeah.
Yeah. Thanks for that.
I'll try.
No, thank you. Yeah, I
just wanted to
Am I up?
Yes.
Okay.
Right. You talked about some of your delegations, in regard to your
role as Associate Minister of Agriculture, and I'm delighted that you have
the delegation for Maori agri business, and I'm really looking forward to taking
you to Hou Farms on the 8th July, which is a
Ngati Apa and Artihau farm run by Jared Claude,
so that's fantastic. Finalists in the Balanced Farm Environment Awards.
Mm-hmm.
Anyway, I'm just wondering what-
Good sales pitch
... to get to the point, what other organizations and groups you've
engaged with in your, now that you're the new minister, in relation to your
delegations.
Across all of my delegations?
Yes.
Yeah. My boots have hardly
got back on the ground. Look, the ministry's
keeping me very busy,
up and down the lengths of the country.
But, in terms of
the Maori agri business, made sure I've been up Āhu Whenua
FOMA. I'm heading up to Gisborne shortly, heading over to you
shortly, Suz. I've been to Ngāi Tahu dairy farms in
Oxford.
The catchment groups, certainly been involved with a lot of catchment groups.
Organics, I've met with Brendan Hoare and Scott Lawson, I think it is.
They're incredibly passionate about the sector.
I've attended the Fonterra Organic Awards in Taupō.
The arable, met with Scott Champion and Sarah Clark
and David Burker down in Christchurch on the farm.
And continue to have engagement with all of the arable growers.
And then what else have we got? Rural catchment, water security and storage.
Certainly engaged with a lot of people about potential projects.
But as I say, a lot of those interlink, so the conversations are quite often about
more than one thing. Yep.
Organics Aotearoa New Zealand with Scott Lawson and Brendan Hoare.
Yep.
So, yeah, and my diary's looking just as busy going forward as-
No, thank you very much for what you're doing for the sector.
It's much appreciated.
It's been great.
Yeah.
It's been great to have the opportunity to go out and engage, and actually listen
to them.
Not talk at them, listen to them. So it's great, and there's certainly a lot of
passion, which is admirable.
Ka pai.
Steve. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'm not sure if I've got this quite correct, but I've got sustainable land
management and climate change research for essential fresh water
Maori agricultural business service providers.
Me too.
Is this captured under the Maori agri business?
Slab AC.
Yeah.
Wow.
So we've got a $300,000 cut from 400K in '25,
'26, down to 100K.
And I'm wondering what that cut means won't be
happening. The cuts specifically impact Tai Apa, the Whenua Charitable
Trust, north and south.
I think,
I'm pretty sure what you're looking at here is,
that funding stream for
that particular set of programs, climate related change programs, sustainable
land management programs-
Yeah
... was always coming to a conclusion.
Right.
And so that's been phasing down. The projects that were still in there
were going to their end point, so nothing got discontinued.
But, if you remember, there was a large uplift in climate related
investment, roughly $100 million a year that came in a range of other things.
So we sort of essentially exchanged out.
We've got other programs that we can fund climate related initiatives out of.
So nobody's program that was mid-ship's got discontinued.
Okay.
Pretty sure I can-
Yes, that's correct.
We've got another one on water storage.
Yeah. Last one, Steve. We're
Running out of time. Okay. So you guys have given an $18 million
loan for Tukituki Water, which has spent 40
million bucks already on scoping over previous years.
Have you got any other money set aside for
funding big irrigation in the coming expenditure?
You probably said the growth fund.
Yeah.
Yeah. So my-
Is there any particular amount of that that's earmarked?
Well,
essentially,
the fund operates on roughly $60 odd million a year.
Yeah.
And so there is plenty of room in the fund to support water storage and security
programmes.
Yeah.
Where we sit on this is, once a group
of people have kind of formed something up,
they have to have the genesis of an idea and get it to a certain level, and then
we can back some of the additional work to get it to
pre-construction phase. So that gets to a point that
it can raise capital and so on if it's a good idea.
And so we can invest several million in each of those projects.
Some of them are small, they might be in the hundreds of thousands.
Some of them will run to a bit more than that.
And that is how
a range of the big and small developments that you're seeing
in water storage have occurred.
Okay.
That work was done sort of over the last 10 years.
Some of it's come to fruition, some of it hasn't.
So yeah, we do have funding available, and if you're talking to people that want to
do something... So it doesn't have to be a big thing. Could be a big thing.
A lot of them have been a bit smaller actually, to support a range of farms.
We can get in behind that.
Could that growth fund be used to support a group of cooperative growers
wanting to purchase a food processing facility and-
It could help with the feasibility study.
It's already done that, I think, but could it go towards helping with underwriting
the cost of purchase?
I wouldn't have thought so, no, because we don't invest it in capital.
In canal.
Yeah.
All right. Thank you very much,
team. We've come to Byron.
Yeah.
Appreciate
your full answers, and there may be a couple of questions come in
post-hearing.
Thank you very much for having us.
Very good.
No worries.
Thanks, Steve. Thank you.